Move "Variables" from YAML docs to a dedicated guide (#43212)
fleetdm/fleet: articles/fleet-variables.md

| `$FLEET_VAR_HOST_HARDWARE_SERIAL` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | iOS and iPadOS | Host's hardware serial number. Not available for user enrolled iOS and iPadOS hosts with Managed Apple Account. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_HOST_UUID` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | iOS and iPadOS | Host's hardware UUID, or Enrollment ID for user enrolled iOS and iPadOS hosts. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_HOST_PLATFORM` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | iOS and iPadOS | Host's platform. Values are `"macos"`, `"ios"`, `"ipados"`, and `"windows"`. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_CUSTOM_SCEP_CHALLENGE_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | None | Fleet-managed one-time challenge password used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. `<CA_NAME>` should be replaced with name of the custom SCEP certificate authority configured in **Settings > Integrations > Certificate authorities**. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_CUSTOM_SCEP_PROXY_URL_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | None | Fleet-managed SCEP proxy endpoint URL used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. |

> | `$FLEET_VAR_SCEP_RENEWAL_ID` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | None | Fleet-managed ID that's required to automatically renew Smallstep, Microsoft NDES, and custom SCEP certificates. The ID must be specified in the Organizational Unit (OU) field in the configuration profile. |

Reviewer: Lost this change:
```suggestion
| `$FLEET_VAR_CERTIFICATE_RENEWAL_ID`                | macOS, iOS, iPadOS, Windows | Fleet-managed ID that's required to automatically renew certificates. The ID must be specified in the Organizational Unit (OU) field in the configuration profile. |
```

# Built-in variables

_Available in Fleet Premium_

> You can use Fleet's built-in variables to incorporate IdP or host vitals into a configuration profiles or managed app configurations for deploying-device specific settings. You can also use [custom variables](https://fleetdm.com/guides/secrets-in-scripts-and-configuration-profiles) to define your own key-value pairs. Variables prefixed with `$FLEET_VAR_` will be populated by Fleet when sending profiles or app configuration to the host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fleet supports built-in variables (prefixed with `$FLEET_VAR_`) to inject host vitals into [configuration profiles](https://fleetdm.com/guides/custom-os-settings) or [managed app configurations](TODO). 

You can also create [custom variables](https://fleetdm.com/guides/secrets-in-scripts-and-configuration-profiles) (prefixed with `$FLEET_SECRET_`) to define your own key-value pairs. 
```

@marko-lisica I shorted it up.

> Fleet also supports adding [GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/variables#defining-environment-variables-for-a-single-workflow) or [GitLab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ci/variables/) environment variables in your configuration profiles and managed app configuration. Use `$ENV_VARIABLE` format.

Author: Removed this, since we already link to custom variables guide.

> When the variable's value changes, configuration profiles are automatically resent. Managed app configurtaion is applied on next install or update.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the variable's value changes, Fleet automatically resends configuration profiles. For managed app configurations, changes apply on next app install or update.
```

> Supported variables are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Built-in variables:
```

> In Fleet Premium, you can use reserved variables beginning with `$FLEET_VAR_`. Fleet will populate these variables when profiles are sent to hosts. Supported variables are:

Author: Merged this with first paragraph.

| `$FLEET_VAR_DIGICERT_DATA_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed base64-encoded certificate data issued by a specified DigiCert certificate authority during PKCS12 profile deployment. `<CA_NAME>` should be replaced with name of the DigiCert certificate authority configured in **Settings > Integrations > Certificate authorities**. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SCEP_WINDOWS_CERTIFICATE_ID` | Windows | None | ID used for SCEP configuration profile on Windows. It must be included in the `<LocURI>` field. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SMALLSTEP_SCEP_CHALLENGE_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed one-time Smallstep challenge password used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. `<CA_NAME>` should be replaced with name of the Smallstep certificate authority configured in **Settings > Integrations > Certificate authorities**. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SMALLSTEP_SCEP_PROXY_URL_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed Smallstep SCEP proxy endpoint URL used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. |

> In XML, certain characters (`&`, `<`, `>`, `"`, `'`) must be escaped because they have special meanings in the markup language. GitHub and GitLab environment variables, as well as Fleet's reserved variables, will be automatically escaped when used in a `.mobileconfig` configuration profile. For example, `&` will become `&amp;`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> In XML, certain characters (`&`, `<`, `>`, `"`, `'`) must be escaped because they have special meanings in the markup language. GitHub and GitLab environment variables, as well as Fleet's reserved variables, will be automatically escaped when used in a `.mobileconfig` configuration profile. For example, `&` will become `&amp;`.

Reviewer 2: @marko-lisica I think it makes sense to move these two paragraphs about escaping into the custom variables guide instead. 

Why? I think this built-in variables guide is a reference for what built-ins are available and how they work. We already talk about escaping in the custom variables guide:

<img width="789" height="138" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/049eceb7-fdc0-4249-8340-1e66b07569bc" />

Author: I agree. I removed those paragraphs.

If certificate authority (CA) variables (ex. `$FLEET_VAR_DIGICERT_DATA_<CA_NAME>`) don't exist, GitOps dry runs will succeed but GitOps runs will fail.

> To hide variable values in the API and UI, you can use Fleet's [custom variables](https://fleetdm.com/guides/secrets-in-scripts-and-configuration-profiles#gitops) in configuration profiles and managed app configuration (iOS and iPadOS).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think we can pull this part out. It's more relevant to the custom variables guide and it's already mentioned:

<img width="753" height="68" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8b429ede-60d8-45f4-9871-6d8798987712" />

<meta name="category" value="guides">
<meta name="authorGitHubUsername" value="marko-lisica">
<meta name="authorFullName" value="Marko Lisica">
<meta name="publishedOn" value="2026-04-08">

> <meta name="articleTitle" value="Variables">

Author: ```suggestion
<meta name="articleTitle" value="Built-in variables">
```

# Built-in variables

_Available in Fleet Premium_

> Fleet supports built-in variables (prefixed with `$FLEET_VAR_`) to inject host vitals into [configuration profiles](https://fleetdm.com/guides/custom-os-settings) or [managed app configurations](TODO). 

Author: ```suggestion
Fleet supports built-in variables (prefixed with `$FLEET_VAR_`) to inject host vitals into [configuration profiles](https://fleetdm.com/guides/custom-os-settings) or [iOS/iPadOS managed app configurations](https://fleetdm.com/guides/install-app-store-apps#ios-and-ipados-managed-configuration). 
```

| `$FLEET_VAR_DIGICERT_DATA_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed base64-encoded certificate data issued by a specified DigiCert certificate authority during PKCS12 profile deployment. `<CA_NAME>` should be replaced with name of the DigiCert certificate authority configured in **Settings > Integrations > Certificate authorities**. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SCEP_WINDOWS_CERTIFICATE_ID` | Windows | None | ID used for SCEP configuration profile on Windows. It must be included in the `<LocURI>` field. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SMALLSTEP_SCEP_CHALLENGE_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed one-time Smallstep challenge password used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. `<CA_NAME>` should be replaced with name of the Smallstep certificate authority configured in **Settings > Integrations > Certificate authorities**. |
| `$FLEET_VAR_SMALLSTEP_SCEP_PROXY_URL_<CA_NAME>` | macOS, iOS, iPadOS | None | Fleet-managed Smallstep SCEP proxy endpoint URL used during SCEP certificate configuration profile deployment. |

> The dollar sign (`$`) can be escaped so it's not considered a variable by using a backslash (e.g. `\$100`). Additionally, `MY${variable}HERE` syntax can be used to put strings around the variable.

Author: ```suggestion
```
